IBX-1430: Revise REST API documentation for 4.x (#1591)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/api/rest_api_extension.md

# Extending REST API

To imagine what could be added to the REST API and to understand what the examples below are overriding, customizing or extending, it's important to picture the [REST request lifecycle](rest_api_usage.md#rest-communication-summary).

## Adding a custom media-type

In this example case, a new media-type will be passed in the `Accept` header of a GET request to `/content/locations/{locationPath}` route and its Controller action (`Controller/Location::loadLocation`).

By default, this resource handle a `application/vnd.ibexa.api.Location+xml` (or `+json`) `Accept` header.
The following example will add the handling of a new media-type `application/app.api.Location+xml` (or `+json`) `Accept` header to obtain a different Response using the same controller.

> * To create the new Response corresponding to this new media-type, a new `ValueObjectVisitor` is needed.

Author: In ec5299569013f8b12f092889e5e7820ca7623211 I introduce this rephrasing:

```markdown
You need the following elements:
* A `ValueObjectVisitor` to create the new response corresponding to the new media type;
* A `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher` to have this `ValueObjectVisitor` used to visit the default controller result;
* An `Output\Visitor` service associating this new `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher` with the new media type.
```

* To have this new `ValueObjectVisitor` used to visit the default Controller result, a new `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher` is needed.
* To have this new `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher` associated to the new media-type in an `Accept` header, a new `Output\Visitor` service is needed.

!!! note

>     You may not change the vendor from default `vnd.ibexa.api` to new `app.api` like in this example but create a new type in the default vendor instead.

Author: @DominikaK This is the opposite to what I wanted to say…
What about this?:

```suggestion
    You can change the vendor name (from default `vnd.ibexa.api` to new `app.api` like in this example), or you can create a new type in the default vendor (like `vnd.ibexa.api.Greeting` in the "[Creating a new REST resource](#creating-a-new-rest-resource)" example).
```

>     You may not change the vendor from default `vnd.ibexa.api` to new `app.api` like in this example but create a new type in the default vendor instead.

Reviewer: Sounds good, just one more nitpick

    To do so, your new ValueObjectVisitor will be tagged with `ibexa.rest.output.value_object.visitor` to be added to the existing `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher` and no new one will be needed.
    The `media-type` attribute would also be easier to create as the default `Output\Generator` will use this default vendor.
    In this example, to create a new vendor has been chosen as a good practice to highlight that this is custom and won't be available on a regular Ibexa DXP.

### New `RestLocation` `ValueObjectVisitor`

The Controller action returns a `Values\RestLocation` wrapped in a `Values\CachedValue`.
The new `ValueObjectVisitor` has to visit `Values\RestLocation` to prepare the new `Response`.

> All new `ValueObjectVisitor` needs to extend the abstract class `Output\ValueObjectVisitor` to be accepted by the `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher`.

Author: @DominikaK 
The `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher` checks inheritance before using a `ValueObjectVisitor` and throw an error if not satisfied. So, the tagging that comes latter is not enough. If you tag a `ValueObjectVisitor` not extending or inheriting the right base class, it is rejected. I do not have a lot of ideas to rephrase this.
 
```suggestion
To be accepted by the `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher`, all new `ValueObjectVisitor` needs to extend the abstract class `Output\ValueObjectVisitor`.
```

| `$generator` | The actual response generator. It provides you with a DOM like API.                                                                                    |
| `$data`      | The visited data. The exact object that you returned from the controller.<br/>It can't have a type declaration because the method signature is shared. |

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/rest_api/src/Rest/ValueObjectVisitor/Greeting.php') =]]
```

The `Values/Greeting` class is linked to its `ValueObjectVisitor` through the service tag.

``` yaml
# config/services.yaml
services:
    #…
[[= include_file('code_samples/api/rest_api/config/services.yaml', 43, 48) =]]
```

Here, the media-type will be `application/vnd.ibexa.api.Greeting` plus a format. To have another vendor than the default, a new `Output\Generator` could be created or the `ValueObjectVisitor` could hard-code it like the [`RestLocation`'s one from previous example](#new-restlocation-valueobjectvisitor).

### InputParser

It could use route parameters, but this example's goal is to illustrate the usage of an input parser.

> For this example, the structure will be a `GreetingInput` root node with two leaf nodes, `Salutation` and `Recipient`.

Author: I also have to give the path to the file around here to remove it from the file itself.

# Extending REST API

To decide how to extend the REST API and to understand what the examples below are overriding, customizing or extending, it's important to picture the [REST request lifecycle](rest_api_usage.md#rest-communication-summary).

## Adding a custom media type

In this example case, you pass a new media type in the `Accept` header of a GET request to `/content/locations/{locationPath}` route and its controller action (`Controller/Location::loadLocation`).

By default, this resource takes an `application/vnd.ibexa.api.Location+xml` (or `+json`) `Accept` header.
The following example adds the handling of a new media type `application/app.api.Location+xml` (or `+json`) `Accept` header to obtain a different response using the same controller.

* To create the new response corresponding to this new media type, you need a new `ValueObjectVisitor`.
* To have this new `ValueObjectVisitor` used to visit the default controller result, you need a new `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher`.
* To have this new `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher` associated to the new media type in an `Accept` header, you need a new `Output\Visitor` service.

!!! note

>     You may not change the vendor from default `vnd.ibexa.api` to new `app.api` like in this example but create a new type in the default vendor instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You can change the vendor name (from default `vnd.ibexa.api` to new `app.api` like in this example), or you can create a new media type in the default vendor (like `vnd.ibexa.api.Greeting` in the [Creating a new REST resource](#creating-a-new-rest-resource) example).
```

Author: No quote nor italic, OK.

    To do so, tag your new ValueObjectVisitor with `ibexa.rest.output.value_object.visitor` to add it to the existing `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher`, and a new one will not be needed.
    This way, the `media-type` attribute is also easier to create, because the default `Output\Generator` uses this default vendor.
    This example presents creating a new vendor as a good practice, to highlight that this is custom extensions that isn't available in a regular Ibexa DXP installation.

### New `RestLocation` `ValueObjectVisitor`

The controller action returns a `Values\RestLocation` object wrapped in `Values\CachedValue`.
The new `ValueObjectVisitor` has to visit `Values\RestLocation` to prepare the new `Response`.

> All new `ValueObjectVisitor` needs to extend the abstract class `Output\ValueObjectVisitor` to be accepted by the `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be accepted by the `ValueObjectVisitorDispatcher`, all new `ValueObjectVisitor` need to extend the abstract class `Output\ValueObjectVisitor`.
```
